# Unit 2 (College Board Unit 3.3-4.4, 4.10)

After the French and Indian war (sometimes called the Great War for Empire), Britain was in very high debt. Now that it was not embroiled in many foreign affairs anymore, it could focus on the colonies. In order to recoup their debt, they enacted many taxes on the colonies, and also began enforcing trade laws more strictly.

The first major act passed was the Proclamation of 1763, which prevented colonists from moving north of the Appalachian mountains in order to avoid provoking the remaining French settlers and Native Americans. This was one of the first instances of the colonists’ freedom being curtailed at the benefit of Britain.

Parliament then began passing a series of taxes. Throughout the development towards the Revolutionary War, there were several prime ministers who each had a different attitude towards the colonies. The first was Grenville, who passed the Sugar Act, a tax on foreign sugar, which was often used by molasses distilleries for its cheap price. It also set up “vice admiralty courts”, which were British courts that were much more likely to convict people who violated the Navigation Acts (which were now more strictly enforced). The Quartering Act of 1765 also angered the colonists, since it required them to provide food and shelter for British soldiers stationed at the colonies, shifting Britain’s economical pressure onto the colonists. Another famously unpopular act was the Stamp Act, which taxed all printed materials. This act was particularly unpopular because it was an internal tax, meaning it taxed something that originated and never left the colonies. Furthermore, despite this, the colonists had no way of negotiating such an act because they had no representation in Parliament. Parliament attempted to pacify the colonists by claiming they had “virtual representation” in the form of rich merchants who were supposedly sympathetic towards colonial interests.

The Stamp Act was the initial spark for the colonists’ rebellious spirit. It triggered the formation of the Stamp Act Congress, a meeting of representatives from 9 colonies to discuss the current situation in British affairs. They did not come to any radical conclusions, though. Another organization created was the Sons and Daughters of Liberty. The Sons of Liberty used force to express themselves by terrorizing British officials and those who were sympathetic towards the British, while the Daughters of Liberty used boycotts in order to reduce the effectiveness of British taxes as well as hurting the British economy by refusing to purchase their exports. As a result of this pressure, Grenville eventually repealed the Stamp act, but also issued a “Declaratory Act”, which asserted that Parliament had full power to make decisions for the colonists.

Grenville eventually left his position as Prime Minister, and Charles Townshend took his place. He first passed the Townshend Acts, which were a collection of taxes meant to pay for the salaries of British officials stationed in the colonies. It also allowed officials to search homes suspected of holding smuggled commerce, as long as the official had a “writ of assistance”. While the Townshend acts introduced external taxes, the colonists were still unhappy, since they still did not have any representation within the Parliament that was levying these taxes. As a result, particularly influential colonists began writing literatures aimed to inform other colonists of the current injustice that was occurring. British officials used forceful methods to prevent such distribution of literature, but they were not entirely successful. Eventually, due increased protest, boycotts that hurt British economy, and low overall revenue, the Townshend Acts were repealed.

The final Prime Minister to oversee the colonies was Lord North, who was the person that repealed the Townshend acts. Under Lord North’s rule, no new acts were passed for a short period, and the only incident that occurred was the Boston Massacre, an event where British soldiers fired upon a group of colonists who were harassing them. This event was used to drive anti-British sentiment. While no issues other than the Boston Massacre arose, many Americans still distrusted the British. This lead to the formation of Committees of Correspondence, which were networks of mail that discussed colonist-British affairs.

Then, in 1773, the silence was interrupted by the passing of the Tea Act, which was designed to raise revenue for the East India company by making their tea very cheap. The colonists opposed this act because although the tea was cheaper, it still contained a tax. A large amount of tea was destroyed during the Boston Tea Party, where, in opposition towards this act, many Patriots boarded British ships and hurled 342 chests of tea in to the New England harbor.

The Tea Party was the final straw for Parliament, and it lead to the passage of the final set of acts before the Revolutionary War would be set off. These were the Coercive Acts, also known as the Intolerable Acts towards the colonists. These were specifically aimed towards New England colonists, because these acts were mainly in retaliation of the Tea Party. These acts forced the Boston harbor to shut down until the missing tea was paid for, reiterated the quartering acts to allow British troops to be quartered in homes, and allowed royal officials to be tried in Britain, where they would receive lighter or no consequences for their actions. A minor act that closely followed the coercive acts was the Quebec Act, which provided French Canadians living near the Ohio River additional land. This act was fairly inconsequential compared to the Coercive Acts, though it did raise the suspicion of some colonists.

As a result of the continued infringement on their rights, the colonists sent delegates to meet in the First Continental Congress, which was a meeting to discuss how to respond to Parliament’s actions. It was made up of many notable politicians at the time, including Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, and John Adams, who were the most radical, George Washington and John Dickinson, who did not have opinions as strong, as well as John Jay and Joseph Galloway, who were not in favor of any major changes. The First Continental Congress did not well represent the Loyalists, who still supported the King. Nevertheless, the result of this meeting was fairly moderate, and focused on asking Parliament for compromise rather than independence. It also set up a boycott of British goods.

Parliament and the King did not respond well to the Continental Congress’s petition for compromise, and instead doubled down its military action on Massachusetts. This directly resulted in the battles of Lexington and Concord, the first battles of the Revolutionary War, which occurred when Thomas Gage, a British general, sent British troops to seize colonial supplies in Concord, Massachusetts. Warned of the British movement by riders Paul Revere and William Dawes, the colonial militia (minutemen) assembled at Lexington to meet the British. However, they were no match for the highly trained British army. Only after the British had destroyed the supplies in Concord and were marching back did the minutemen inflict some sort of damage on the troops. Other battles followed, such as the Battle of Bunker Hill, where the British gained a strategic position at the cost of large casualties.

During the initial breakout of war, the Second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia. They appointed George Washington as the commander in chief of the new Continental Army and also called on colonies to sent volunteers. They also sent King George a final plea for compromise, the Olive Branch Petition, which he rejected. The Second Continental Congress was also responsible for the writing and signing of the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776.

As the war moved onwards, specific groups of people assumed distinct roles in the fighting. About half of the colonial population supported the new American identity (Patriots), and about a quarter were Loyalists. The other quarter was neutral. The British military was highly trained, had much more resources than the Patriots, who, on the other hand, were made up of unskilled farmers, who were not very dedicated to fighting. Their lack of resources was partially made up for by the strong dedication of few exemplary soldiers.

Women also played a role during the revolutionary war as the constituents of the Daughters of Liberty. Women took sides, with most indirectly supporting the Patriots or Loyalists, and some even participating in fighting. While fathers and sons were away, women took over their home jobs and provided much of the food and clothing during the war. The role of women in homes also changed, where the education of women was now supported, since then they could educate their children on the values of the new republic. Still, women would remain as second-class citizens for many years to come, despite the protests of many influential women like Abigail Adams, whose husband was John Adams.

African Americans also participated in fighting, with some being lured into the British military by the Philipsburg Proclamation, which promised freedom for slaves that deserted their owners. Surprisingly, despite the British loss, these slaves indeed became freedmen. In response to the Philipsburg Proclamation, Washington decided that the Continental Army might as well also enlist African Americans. The Continental Congress also abolished the importation of new enslaved people, which lead to the Northern colonies abolishing slavery altogether. The southern colonies, on the other hand saw that slavery was essential to their prosperity, and thus continued the practice of slavery.

Native Americans at this point were generally unhappy with the colonists, and most remained either nonpartisan or sided with the British during the Revolutionary war. As a result they did not get many benefits when the British were defeated.

Those that remained Loyalists (Tories) in the colonies sided with the British and aided the British army against the Patriots. Sometimes, families and friendships would be split because individual members had different allegiances.

The first half of the Revolutionary War went terribly for the Continental Army, which lost many northern areas as well as even Philadelphia. After losing Philadelphia, they spent a severe winter at Valley Forge, where morale was at an all-time low.

The turning point for the Patriots occurred during the victory in Saratoga, which happened in New York. There, they defeated British General John Burgoyne’s army, which became isolated as a result of their slow movement. Up until this point, the French had actually been secretly sending money and supplies to the revolutionary, but, encouraged by the major victory, the French openly announced their alliance with the colonists after the victory in Saratoga. The French saw this alliance as a benefit, since it gave them an opportunity to sever Britain’s ties to its lucrative colonies. In response to the development of the war, the British decided that it was best to consolidate their forces and pursue a plan called the Southern Strategy. This involved leaving the northern colonies and capturing their way through the southern states, based on the assumption that the southern states were less populated and had much higher Loyalist population. The Southern Strategy was initially successful, and the British captured a large amount of rebel cities. Their assumption about the Loyalist population was also correct. However, as a result of cruel British practices, many colonists who were previously nonpartisan or only slightly patriotic turned against the British. As a result, the militia and even civilians began to retake captured strongholds, which eventually lead to a siege on Yorktown, where Cornwallis’s army, the primary British force in their Southern Strategy, was trapped by the French Navy and American/French forces in the city of Yorktown. As a result, the British Southern Strategy, Britain’s last attempt to put down colonial rebellion, was thwarted, signaling the end of the Revolutionary War.

The news of the British defeat in Yorktown, combined with other upsets and financial burdens made the Tory party in Parliament very unpopular. They were replaced with the Whig party, which wanted to end the war. As a result, the Treaty of Paris (1783), not to be confused with the Treaty of Paris in 1763 was signed. This treaty officially recognized the United States as an independent nation, expanded their territory past the Proclamation Line from 1763, and also outlined an American promise to return confiscated property to the Loyalists.

The news of the American victory was a spark in the political world. Nobody had ever seen a country declare and secure independence from their monarchial rulers. It served as an inspiration from the French revolution, which overthrew the French monarchy, the Irish War of Independence, the Haitian Revolution, ending their slavery on sugar plantations, and many Latin American revolutions against the Spanish.

The first task after declaring their independence was for the colonists to set up a new government. At the time, states had the freedom to write their own individual constitutions, many of which did. These constitutions were characterized by lists of natural rights, separation of powers, and voting. The Second Continental Congress wanted to set up some form of central government. Since they were doing this during wartime, naturally, a minimal form of government, the Articles of Confederation, was chosen. This preserved many of the states’ rights by creating a weak central government. This government had only one ruling body, a congress made up of delegates from each state. Each state had equal representation in this congress. The government also had only basic diplomatic powers, such as the ability to wage war or to make treaties. Despite their weak powers, the central government still made some important accomplishments. These were the land ordinances of the 1780s. The Land Ordinance of 1785 allowed the surveying of the newly earned western lands, and also required that public education was to be regularly implemented in such lands. The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 prohibited slavery in these new territories, and also set the rules for statehood in these unsettled territories. This made settling the western territories attractive to Whites and Freedmen.

The Articles of Confederation would not last, though, because it had too many problems and weaknesses. It was too weak to enforce the terms specified in their own Treaty of Paris, and also did not have the power to protect settlers from the British and Spanish forces on the western frontier. It caused economic issues since it did not have the right to tax the states, so the government had many unpaid debts. It was also powerless to stop the individual states from engaging in economic conflict with each other. It also did not have the power to stop state-level practices that were unfair towards the colonists. These unfair practices were the cause of Shay’s rebellion, where farmers and Revolutionary War veterans started an uprising against the Massachusetts state government due to high taxes and harsh penalties for debtors. They had to be put down by the state militia, since the Articles of Confederation did not allow the creation of a national military.

Because of these problems, politicians agreed that some sort of revision on the Articles of Confederation was needed. This resulted in a series of meetings which all culminated at the Constitutional convention in Philadelphia. Each state sent delegates, except for Rhode Island, which made 55 delegates in total. Some important politicians of the time like Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton were not present at the convention.

The first task of the convention was to elect a presiding chairman. They unanimously elected George Washington. Next, they decided that all discussions in the convention were to be secret. With these housekeeping tasks completed, the convention officially opened.

The first realization in the convention was that the delegates all had different ideas of what to do to the Articles of Confederation. Some wanted to simply revise it, and others wanted to create a new document to replace it. During debate, the delegates formed groups based on their ideas. The Federalists were in support of a stronger central government. Their large number and the absence of politicians who would later become anti-Federalists allowed them to take control of the convention.

The convention discussed many key issues. One of them was how to implement representation in the new constitution. Delegates from larger states naturally wanted representation based on population (New Jersey Plan), while delegates from smaller states favored equal representation (Virginia Plan). In the end, Roger Sherman proposed the Great Compromise, which would implement both these forms of representation in Congress as bicameral system. The Senate would implement equal representation, and the House of Representatives would implement population-based representation.

Since the the House of Representatives used population to decide the number of delegates, the issue of slavery rose up. How would slaves be counted? Ironically, Southern delegates, who typically believed slaves to be akin to property, argued that slaves should be included in population counts. Northerners, who did not have slaves, disliked this idea. In the end, another compromise had to be made. The Three-Fifths Compromise allowed the counting of slaves to decide representation, but mandated that a slave only consisted of 3/5ths of a person. For the actual problem of slavery itself, the Congress just decided to deal with it later, after 20 years. In the meantime slavery and importation of slaves was still allowed.

Another issue that arose when the Articles of Confederation were practiced was economic conflict between states. States often put tariffs on out-of state imports, which hurt the economy of other states. In order to fix this, the Commercial Compromise said that Congress could regulate interstate and foreign commerce, and also put tariffs on foreign imports. It prevented Congress from collecting tax on exports, however.

The Constitution also introduced a position for the head of the state, the President. It was here that they set the term limits for a president at four years, and also created the Electoral College system. This give more representation in the presidential vote to smaller states, and less representation to the larger states, making it more difficult for a majority faction to decide the next president (a faction is a group of people united together, who often want something at the expense of other people).

The Constitution also extended the power of the government, by giving it the final word in anything that affected the whole country, such as raising a military or foreign affairs. In order to prevent these powers from being mismanaged, they created the three branches of government that are known today. The legislative branch creates legislations, the executive branch (president) signs them into law or vetos them, and the judicial branch interprets these laws or rules themz unconstitutional.

Now that the main points of the Constitution were completed, the final step to putting the Constitution into practice was getting it ratified by each of the states. The delegates at the convention (Framers), decided that 9 out of the 13 states needed to ratify the Constitution for it to be put into place. Each state would figure out whether or not they should ratify the constitution, using whatever method they liked. Usually these methods involved conventions for politicians and voting.

The process of ratification lasted for a long time and there were many debates upon whether to do so. Those that supported the Constitution and the stronger central government that it created were called the Federalists, and those that did not were aptly named the anti-Federalists. The Federalists argued that the Constitution was necessary due to the weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation, and also portrayed the anti-Federalists as negative people who only complained. The anti-Federalists argued that such a constitution would give too many rights to the central government, which is what they had only previously fought a war to escape. They also noted that the Constitution did not have a Bill of Rights that would protect inherent freedoms. This complaint was useful because later, a Bill of Rights was indeed added to the Constitution. The Federalists were generally more organized, and leading federalists such as Alexander Hamilton and John Jay wrote 85 essays in a book called The Federalist Papers in order to convince people about the benefits of the Constitution.

As it turned out, the lack of a Bill of Rights was the anti-Federalists’ most significant grievance against the constitution, so the compromise to add the Bill of Rights was enough to reach the 9 of 13 states necessary for ratification. The delegates were still concerned, though, since the two largest states, New York and Virginia still did not ratify the Constitution. However, because of the Bill of Rights, Virginia ratified the Constitution by a narrow margin, and New York followed suit. The Bill of Rights consisted of ten amendments that were appended to the Constitution. Note that there are way more than ten amendments nowadays, but the Bill of Rights only describes the first ten.

The Constitution was put into practice in the year 1788, where members of the Legislative branch were elected, and George Washington was unanimously elected as the first president. George Washington needed to appoint members of various cabinets, which he did so. The legislative branch also passed its first legislation, the Judiciary Act of 1789, which established the Supreme Court to have one chief justice and five other justices. It also created 13 smaller district courts, which were lower in hierarchy to the Supreme Court.

George Washington’s most significant appointment was that of Alexander Hamilton to be the Secretary of Treasury. Hamilton made many controversial financial decisions. His plan for US finances had three steps- to pay off national debt as well as individual states’ debts, impose tariffs on foreign goods, and to make a national bank that would manage government finances and issue official banknotes. Anti-federalists were unhappy at this plan because it seemed that the tariffs would benefit northern merchants while being of no benefit to farmers, and that the central bank was unconstitutional. They did agree, though, on the management of debt, to which Hamilton in response decided that the capital should be moved somewhere the anti-Federalists had wanted. This place later became Washington DC. The First Bank of the United states was created anyways through the approval of George Washington.

Washington’s first and second term coincided with the French Revolution, where severe turmoil occurred in France after liberal ideas provoked people to overthrow the monarchy, complete with hysteria and mass beheadings. The anti-Federalists sympathized with the revolutionaries, but George Washington took a federalist approach and remained neutral, issuing the Proclamation of Neutrality of 1793. Washington also had to deal with a person called Citizen Genet (it was popular for French revolutionaries to call each other using the title of “Citizen”). He was a French minister to the US who came to the US and began directly recruiting citizens into the French revolutionary cause. He even began outfitting French warships in US ports, which to Washington was a violation of his neutrality policy. At this point, even the anti-Federalists wished for the French government to remove him, which they did.

While the British had no more control over the Americas, they still meddled in US affairs by searching and seizing US merchant ships and impressing US sailors into the British navy. They also refused to leave their posts on the western frontier. Washington sent John Jay, the Chief Justice at the time, to Britain to discuss these problems. He came back with the Jay Treaty, which was unpopular since in it, while Britain did agree to leave it’s western posts, it contained nothing about Britain’s continued harassment of American ships.

Because of this treaty, Spain, a rival of Britain, thought that the US was getting closer to Britain. As a result, officials from Spain met with Thomas Pinckney, and they made the Pinckney treaty, which gave the US a bit more of Florida, and introduced some trade agreements between the two countries.

The Native Americans were also provoked due to the expansion of settlers into the west. They allied themselves and defeated some American militias. Sometimes, the British even helped the Native Americans. This came to be a big problem, so the US Army went to defeat these allied tribes in the Battle of Fallen Timbers near Ohio. The chiefs of these people signed the Treaty of Greenville, which gave even more land to the United States.

Meanwhile, within the United States, Hamilton’s policy of excise tax on whiskey angered farmers. Due to economic circumstances, the burden of the excise tax mainly fell on farmers. They decided to attack tax collectors instead of paying tax. In response, Washington ordered the state militia to put down this rebellion, which was done quickly with almost no bloodshed. This was unpopular to most people since it was a military action against common peoples.

At the end of George Washington’s second term, he decided that he would retire. In his farewell treaty he warned to not get involved in European affairs, not to permanent alliances, and not to make political parties. Unfortunately, by that time, the formation of political parties was already well underway. There were two of them, the Federalists and the Democrat-Republicans. The Federalists wanted a strong central government and standing army, and supported government intervention in the economy. They were supported by the wealthy. On the other hand, the Democrat-Republicans advocated for the exact opposite- a weaker central government and a smaller standing army. They also favored a more hands-off approach to managing the economy. They were supported by most of the non-wealthy.

In the next presidential election, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson from the Federalist and Democratic-Republican parties respectively, ran for president. John Adams won the election and became president, but because Thomas Jefferson received the second highest amount of votes, he became the vice president. This practice changed later after the 12th amendment said that the president and vice president run as a team.

The first problem that Adams had to deal with was the XYZ affair. During the French Revolution, French ships were seizing American ships’ cargo, so Adams sent representatives to negotiate a peaceful solution. When they arrived at France, some unknown French ministers “X” “Y” and “Z” demanded bribes before the negotiations were to occur. This was outrageous to the Americans and they refused to pay and left. The American population was angered by this and wanted to wage war, but Adams heeded to Washington’s warning and decided to simply send new representatives to Paris, avoiding war.

Since the Democrat-Republicans were pro-France, the XYZ affair negatively affected their reputation, and many Federalist representatives entered congress. They took advantage of this majority to pass many controversial acts that would limit the power of the Democrat-Republicans. Since many immigrants voted for the Democrat-Republicans, congress passed the Naturalization act which extended the period of residency for immigrants to become citizens from 5 to 14 years, preventing more immigrants from voting. They passed the Alien Acts, which allowed the president to deport non-citizens that were considered dangerous. They also passed the Sedition Acts, which prevented criticism of the President and Congress.

A US citizen nowadays would look at the Sedition Acts and realize it is completely ridiculous, since it directly violates the First Amendment. At the time, however, the Supreme Court had never established the precedent of judicial review (ruling a legislation unconstitutional). Nevertheless, this did not stop the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, where each of these states decided enact state legislatures that ignored the Sedition acts, because they realized such an act was unconstitutional. The Sedition Acts and other controversial Federalist acts were eventually repealed later, when Federalists lost their grip on the government. In 1803, the Supreme Court established the precent of judicial review, which was used to repeal the Sedition Acts.

In the meantime, the development of an American identity was in full swing. Land titles that had their roots in medieval Europe were slowly abolished, and Loyalist influence was weakened. Many states also loosed their connection towards religion. American styles in arts and literature also emerged.

Now that the war was long over, people began to gain confidence in settling westward. The government was aware of this, and helped these settlers, in ways mentioned previously. The question of slavery also remained an everlasting subject. Immediately after the revolutionary war, slavery was actually on the decline in the south, however, the invention of the cotton gin as well as the stealing of British cotton innovations made cotton farming much more lucrative, which sharply increased the South’s desire for slaves. Cotton farmers in the southwest had a demand for slaves, while falling tobacco prices caused a surplus of slaves in the east, so slaves were often transported to new plantations. Some slaves escaped during these transportations, fleeing to a free northern state. However, the constitution required that fugitives be returned even by free states. Some slaves went as far as Canada or Florida, which were controlled by other countries.

The third president of the United States was Thomas Jefferson. In the 1800 election, the Federalists had already lost a lot of their popularity mainly due to the Alien and Sedition acts. Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr, both Democrat-Republicans, tied for first in the elections, and after much deliberation Thomas Jefferson was selected as President, making Aaron Burr vice president. This change of parties, remarkably, happened without conflict. Historically this is a rare event. The result of this election is called the 1800s Revolution.

While Jefferson was a Democrat-Republican, he made sure to also satisfy the Federalists who still held various positions in the government. He still retained Hamilton’s economic policies (Hamilton was a leading Federalist), and also kept the neutrality policies of Washington and Adams. He did make some Democrat-Republican changes though, such as reducing the size of the military and repealing the excise taxes. To avoid conflict in the cabinet, he only appointed Democrat-Republicans.

Jefferson’s most famous achievement was the Louisiana Purchase from France. This land was once owned by France, who rescinded it to Spain after the Great War of Empire. Later, Napoleon purchased it back from Spain, in hopes of setting up a French empire in the Americas. He got sidetracked with other problems, though, so this land remained unsettled and unexplored. At the time, the New Orleans port was important for American trade, but the Spanish officials who owned the port decided to revoke the terms from the Pinckney treaty and tax the Americans using that port. This made people unhappy, so Jefferson sent ministers to France in order to arrange the purchase of New Orleans. to the ministers’ surprise, Napoleon’s representatives offered the entire Louisiana territory instead. Napoleon really needed money for war against Britain, so he gave an offer so great that the American ministers could not refuse it. While the Jefferson believed in a strict interpretation of the Constitution, the Constitution did not allow the buying of foreign lands, but Jefferson did so anyways. The Federalists in Congress who protested this were easily outnumbered by the Democrat-Republicans, who now had the majority.

The Louisiana Purchase was a great success for the Democrat-Republicans, who believed in the success of the middle-class farmer, as opposed to the Federalists, who wanted America to be an urban society. In order to gain some more knowledge about the new land, Jefferson send Lewis and Clark on an expedition all the way to the Pacific coast in Oregon. This expedition lead to increased geographic knowledge, maps and trails for settlers, and better relations towards American Indians.

Other than the Louisiana purchase, Jefferson had to deal with many more difficult foreign affairs. One was the problem with the Barbary Pirates in Africa, who would attack American ships delivering items to Europe unless they paid a tribute. Jefferson attempted to defeat them with small naval force, to no success. As a result he decided to just continue paying the tribute. The problem of British ships harassing American sailors (cause of the Jay Treaty) was still present. The Chesapeake-Leopard Affair was an extreme example of this, where a British warship fired on the US Chesapeake, killing some American sailors. While American demanded revenge, Jefferson still pursued the policy of neutrality and did not wage war. Instead, he pursued the Embargo act. Britain and France, engaged in conflict, consistently harassed neutral countries, so Jefferson decided to not export anything to foreign ports. This plan backfired, and hurt the American economy much more than the British/French.

Jefferson also strived to rid the government of Federalist influence, much like how the Federalists had done under John Adams. He overturned Federalist acts and appointments, like the Alien and Sedition act. However, in the courts, the only way to remove Federalist judges was to impeach them. Jefferson would never really succeed at doing so, impeaching only one judge on the basis of “mental stability” throughout his entire impeachment campaign.

Jefferson easily won a second term as President in 1804. His former vice president Aaron Burr split from the Democrat-Republicans and made a subdivision of the party called the Quids. The Democrat Republicans met and decided to not nominate Burr for a second term. This made Burr mad, and he tried some other ways to gain leadership. He ran for governor of New York so that he could unite the New England states and secede from the union, but the Hamilton and other Federalists thwarted this plan. After Hamilton had made an insulting remark towards him, Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel, and killed Hamilton. This ended Burr’s political career, and also severely weakened the Federalists, since Hamilton was one of their last great leaders. After this, Burr made yet another unsuccessful plot to united some territories and secede, this time in Mexico.

Despite Jefferson’s efforts to rid the government of Federalist influences, the Chief Justice John Marshall was a Federalist and made many Federalist-oriented rulings.

His first significant ruling was in Marbury v. Madison. In this ruling Marbury was one of the Federalist judges that Adams and appointed just before he left office. Jefferson did not like this and ordered James Madison to block this appointment. Marshall said that while Madison could not do so under the Judiciary Act of 1789, the Judiciary Act itself was unconstitutional, so Madison actually could block the appointment of Marbury. This case established the precent of judicial review, which gave a lot of power to the Supreme Court at the expense of some Federalist judges.

In Fletcher v. Peck, Marshall did something similar, but this time to a state law instead of a federal law.

In Martin v. Hunter’s lease, the court established that it had power over state courts when it came to interpreting constitutional rights.

In Dartmouth College v. Woodward, the court once again deemed a state act to be unconstitutional, since it involved the state forcing a private institution to become a public one (Dartmouth University)

In McCulloch v. Maryland, Maryland tried to tax the Second Bank of the United States, which was situated there. Marshall ruled that Maryland had no such right to tax the bank, which placed the power of federal laws over state laws. He also ended the long running argument on the constitutionality of the bank, supporting Hamilton’s interpretation of the constitution that said that while a bank was not specifically mentioned, the constitution still implied the government could create such a bank.

In Cohens v. Virginia, some brothers wanted to sell lottery tickets from Washington DC in Virginia. While Marshall still upheld the conviction, he established the precedent that the Supreme Court could review the decision of state courts.

In Gibbons v. Ogden, Marshall sided against the creation of a monopoly in New York, which set the precedent that the Supreme court could regulate interstate commerce.

These cases all hold the common theme of granting various powers to the Supreme Court over state affairs.

Before he knew it, Jefferson’s time as president was coming to a close. While there was no rule that a president could hold at most two terms at the time, he followed George Washington’s tradition and left after his second term.

The next president was James Madison. He was a good friend of Jefferson and helped him found the Democrat-Republican party. Madison was a smart guy, but was more reserved and stubborn compared to Jefferson. Jefferson and some other Democrat-Republicans helped him run for president, while another group of Democrat-Republicans nominated some other candidates, and the Federalists nominated Charles Pinckney. Madison easily won this election.

Madison’s presidency mainly dealt with European problems that had also caused problems for Jefferson. He repealed the terrible Embargo Act and instead made the Nonintercourse act, which was similar except it only prohibited exports to Britain and France. Macon, a member of Congress, introduced Macon’s Bill No. 2, which promised an embargo on the opposing country if one country would agree to neutrality terms. Napoleon heard of this and promised neutrality, so the US put an embargo on exports to Britain, but it turned out Napoleon tricked the US, and the French navy still harassed US ships.

These continued naval disputes would become the cause of the War of 1812. Although the British and French were locked in struggle and both violated neutrality policies, the Americans were especially angry towards the British due to their past conduct as well as their harsher practices towards the American ships. Additionally, in the frontier, when Native Americans organized under a leader called Tecumseh, the Americans blamed the British for assisting this alliance. The alliance was destroyed by a preemptive attack by the Americans in the Battle of Tippecanoe.

These factors were emphasized by a group of politicians known as the Warhawks, who wanted War with Britain. These people include Henry Clay, John Calhoun, and other younger Democrat-Republicans. Pressure from these people caused Madison to declare war against Britain in June of 1812, even though by that time Britain had partially suspended it’s blockade against American ships.

This declaration of war was not well agreed upon by the American public as well as the politicians. By that time, the the Democrat-Republican party had split into old (Quids) and new factions, with the Quids agreeing with the Federalists in denouncing the war. Madison, a member of the new Democrat-Republicans, was reelected in the election of 1812. However, it was only the New England states that voted against the war, since commerce with warring nations was highly profitable for them. As a result, the Americans began military practices.

The Americans began their offense be attacking Canada in multiple locations, but these attacks were all unsuccessful. They raided York, a British city and burned some government buildings, but this only provoked the British. Surprisingly, the American navy had several victories against the British due to their refined shipbuilding skills and high morale.

In 1814, Napoleon was defeated, which allowed Britain to focus on North America. They decided to start a Chesapeake campaign, where the British Army marched through the Northern Virginia area and infamously set fire to many buildings in the Capital. During this campaign Francis Scott Key wrote the Star Spangled Banner after watching Fort McHenry holding it’s place during British bombardment.

In the South, forces led by General Andrew Jackson defeated the Creek Indians, a British ally. This also opened up land for US settlers. Jackson’s army also won an impressive victory against the British at New Orleans, though this battle was pointless since it occurred after the peace treaty had already been signed.

It turned out that both the countries did not want to wage war against each other, with America being secretly unconfident in it’s ability to win a decisive victory, and Britain tired out after fighting so many battles against the French and now the Americans. In 1814 the Treaty of Ghent was signed, and simply reversed land borders to the way they were before the war, and nothing else. As a result, the war simply did not have any major effects between Britain and America and is regarded a stalemate.

In an unlucky timing, just before the war was about to end, Federalists met at the Hartford convention to try and secede from the Union because they really did not like the war of 1812, and also tried to propose practices that would make it more difficult to wage war. Unfortunately, shortly after the Hartford convention, the War of 1812 ended, which painted the Federalists as cowardly and unpatriotic.

While there were little effects between the two warring countries, the result of the War of 1812 had many effects on the US. It earned the respect of other countries when the US was able to survive war with Britain twice. The poor reaction of the Federalist party was the final nail in the coffin for the dying party, and it soon became a relic of American history. The British had abandoned their Indian allies, which caused them to lose even more land to settlers. Because of the continued British blockade, the US also moved towards industrial self-sufficiency. This war also gained a lot of confidence for America. When the Barbary Pirates continued to be a problem, this time Monroe sent a proper naval force to stop the north African hostilities. From then on, America’s practices would still try to preserve peace, but focus on nationalist qualities.

After Madison’s presidency ended, James Monroe took his place. While he still had a federalist opponent, he wouldn’t in his second term, where Monroe receive almost all the electoral votes. The period of time where Monroe was president is often called the Era of Good Feelings, since at the time most of America’s problems had been solved already. The “good feelings” in question included nationalism, optimism, and prosperity. However, there were still many conflicts that occurred during this era.

James Monroe was actually once a soldier in the Revolutionary war, and was also the minister to Great Britain. Monroe’s primary goal was to develop the country to become self sufficient. To do so, Congress levied a tariff on foreign goods in the Tariff of 1816 which taxed out of country imports. Henry Clay, one of the former warhawks, now the leader of the House of Representatives, presented the American System, a plan to grow the nation’s economy. It involved tariffs, a national bank, and various internal improvements. Note that the national bank now is called the Second Bank of the United States since the First Bank had it’s charter left to expire during Madison’s presidency. Two of these steps were already done, with the exception of “internal improvements”. This term referred to infrastructure projects that would improve logistics and quality of life among citizens. Madison and Monroe objected to the idea of the federal government funding roads and bridges since it was not in the constitution, so each state was left to their own in terms of building infrastructure.

The first financial crisis in the new country was the financial panic of 1819, where, when the Second Bank of the United States tried to make borrowing money more difficult by increasing interest rates and shortening the time for loan maturity. This caused huge effects, closing state banks and putting people into debt.

During the Era of Good Feelings, westward migration was in full swing. New transportation, economic difficulties in the east, and immigrants all fueled migration towards the west. This created new states, which usually supported causes that would improve immigration, like easier loans, improved transportation and cheap land. However, the issue of slavery rose up again. While new states in the south wanted slavery for cheap labor, states in the north had no use for it. This became a problem because in the House of Representatives, the northern states had a clear advantage over southern states in terms of representation, but not in the Senate, which was perfectly balanced meaning the addition of a new state would unbalance the delegates. This state was Missouri, which happened to be a slave state already. If Missouri were admitted as a slave state, the Southerners would gain the ability to block legislation that favored the North. A Northerner named Tallmadge thought he could come up with a simple solution: admit Missouri as a slave state, but modify it’s constitution with the Tallmadge amendment in order to prevent importation of new slaves and to emancipate slave children at age 25. In other words, slowly abolish slavery. Obviously, this did not sit well with the Southerners. Instead, Henry Clay’s proposals were accepted. This admitted Missouri as a slave state, but to balance the senate, admitted Maine as a free state. It also prohibited slavery north of the 36 degrees 36 minute latitude line, to preemptively even out the status of future states. These proposals are called the Missouri Compromise. The debate over slavery introduced the concept of sectionalism, where people feel devoted to their own region (opposite of nationalism).