# Unit 3 (College Board Unit 4.5-4.13, 5.3)

Many Americans know about the Industrial Revolution, a time where improved technology began to allow for the mass production of many products. However, the industrial Revolution is only a part of a greater revolution called the Market Revolution, which reflects not just technology advancement, but the drastic change in society that came with it.

There are many events that supported the start of the Market Revolution. The first was improvement in agriculture technology. The steel plow and the mechanical reaper, invented by John Deere and Cyrus McCormick respectively greatly reduced necessary human labor and increased output in agriculture. Cheap land and state banks also lessened economic burden on farmers. The country also became more interconnected during this time period- some notable transportation projects included the National (Cumberland) Road and the Erie Canal, which connected the soon-to-be industrialized Northeast with agricultural Northwest, benefiting both populations. There was also remarkable development in rail and water transportation, with the invention of the steamboat by Robert Fulton. In 1844, the telegraph was invented, which allowed information exchange at an unprecedented speed.

At the start of the 1800s, the manufacturing economy of the United States began to surpass its agricultural economy. There were many factors responsible for this change: the introduction of patent laws, which protected inventors of new technology, thereby incentivizing invention with the reward of great wealth; incorporation laws, which made it easier for people to invest in new businesses through purchasing stock; an influx of immigrants, pushed by foreign issues (Revolutions of 1848, Irish Potato Famine), and search of new opportunity, contributing labor and foreign trade secrets (Samuel Slater, who stole a British factory design); and the creation of new labor systems in order to supply those factories with workers. The most notable labor system at the time was called the Lowell System, which was use to supply textile factories in Lowell, Massachusetts, but was later adapted for all sorts of industries. At the time, an agricultural life in the west was the dream of many people, so in order to attract them towards factory life, the inventors of the Lowell system offered them complimentary housing near the factories. Out of those who lived in the west, two populations had the most to gain from the new labor systems: women rejoiced the independent lifestyle they gained living by themselves, whether that be in the cities, or at home while their husbands went to the cities (note that the women who did go tot he cities usually did not work in factories, but in teaching and domestic service), and children, often sent by their parents, who could make more money than they would make anywhere else. However, life as a factory worker was still poor, characterized by long hours, low pay, and bad working conditions. Discontent among workers also grew when tradesmen, now unable to compete with the low prices produced by economies of scale, were forced to give up their old jobs, where they had more autonomy and income. This resulted in the creation of trade unions, which were groups of workers that petitioned for a better environment. Early unions were often unsuccessful though, because of immigrant workers that could replace those who were rebelling, anti-union laws (in Massachusetts though, the Massachusetts Supreme Court ruled unions constitutional in Commonwealth v. Hunt), and economic depressions. Mass migrations to the Northeast increased the populations of urban slums, and while a middle class began to develop, the wealth gap between the ultra-rich also increased. On the other hand, the positive effects of the bloom in manufacturing included greater wages, increased quality of life for those that could afford manufactured goods, and development of small towns near transportation points into big cities (Chicago, near the Great Lakes, St. Louis, near the Mississippi River, etc). People began to believe in the idea of a “self-made man”, who would employ his natural talent in order to take advantage of the growing economy.

One of the most pivotal inventions from this time period was the cotton gin, which was a mechanical tool that separated cotton and cotton seeds from a cotton plant. This used to be a labor intensive process that was performed by hand, and was the sole bottleneck of cotton production. Now that this bottleneck was eliminated through mechanization, the new bottleneck became the lack of labor in cotton farming- resulting in an influx of slave trade in the south, despite the fact that importation of slaves was banned past 1808. A slave could be worth as much as $80,000 in today’s money. At times, slaves would make up 75% of the population (it should be noted, up to three-fourths of southerners could still not afford slaves) in the South, which elicited fears of rebellion. Owners treated their slaves increasingly harshly and enacted stronger laws (slave codes) to alleviate these fears. Cotton farming became a highly profitable business in the south, in fact, many plantation owners began to produce only cotton, and used their profits in order to purchase any other goods they needed. These plantation owners were concentrated in the South. Their desire to farm cotton contributed to the proliferation of southern land, because cotton farming easily exhausted existing land. As a result, many plantation owners and independent farmers moved westward. Religion in the South changed as religions that supported slavery, like Methodists and Baptists grew, while those that did not, like Unitarians, lost popularity.

Southerners needed so much land that they even pushed to Texas, which had not been annexed yet. So many settlers arrived that they vastly outnumbered the 3000 Mexicans who were originally living there. In 1835, Mexico decided to enact some stricter legislations, which were troublesome for the settlers. Some of them, lead by Sam Houston, wanted to go to war and secede Texas from Mexico. The rest of the settlers, the “Peace Party”, led by Stephen Austin, wanted to negotiate compromises. The peace party was initially successful, however, the new president Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna, did not want to cooperate. The settlers started a rebellion, which was violently put down in Alamo by Santa Anna. The Alamo event was widely publicized in the US and elicited very negative response towards Mexicans. As a result many volunteers joined Sam Houston’s militia, which won against the Mexican forces, allowing them to take control of Texas. Van Buren, president at the time, decided not to annex Texas for the time being, because he feared it would provoke war from Mexico.

During the 1820s, a political revolution occurred in the US. In prior times, voting and political participation used to be activities that only the wealthy participated in. However, by the 1820s, many states allowed all white men the right to vote- previously, only landowning men had the right to vote. In 1824, Monroe was set to leave office, and four Democratic-Republicans were set to run against each other to replace Monroe. Among them were John Quincy Adams, Henry Clay, and Andrew Jackson. Jackson won the vote, but he didn’t win a majority, so for all purposes the election was a tie. Adams partnered with Clay- Clay was the Speaker of the House at the time. Adams told Clay that if he used his position to help him to President, he would make Clay the secretary of state (many people who were the secretary of state ended up becoming President later). And so John Quincy Adams became President, and kept true to his promise by appointing Clay as the secretary of state. Jackson supporters called this a “corrupt bargain” for obvious reasons.

John Quincy Adams, being the son of a Federalist, used the power of the central government in order to bring various improvements to the nation. Jackson’s supporters, of course, believed that this was an overuse of government power. The key highlight that put an removable blemish on Quincy Adams’s presidency was when he enacted the Tariff of 1828. This was a high tariff on foreign goods, which satisfied northern manufacturers, but not southerners, who now had to pay higher prices for manufactured goods. Furthermore, since the British began earning less revenue from American trade, they also could not purchase as much cotton and other Southern products as they once had, hurting the Southern economy even more.

By the Election of 1828, Quincy Adams’s chances for reelection were looking grim, and Andrew Jackson (”Old Hickory”) easily won the election. The Election of 1828 was different from other elections in that it involved much more interaction with the general public (now that non-landowning white men could vote). Campaigns also included vicious slandering of other candidates- for example, Adams’s campaign frequently accused Jackson’s wife of adultery (there was some truth to this).

Quincy Adams is known as the last “traditional” President. When Jackson entered office, it was immediately noticeable that, compared to past presidents, he placed a much higher priority on the working/middle class (the “common man”). While other presidents often came from aristocratic families, Jackson did not have such an upbringing- he was orphaned during the Revolutionary War, became a lawyer without attending college, and frequently participated in duels. He also differed from other presidents in his actions. When he entered office, he immediately removed any non-democrats from their positions in government, and appointed democrats that he was on good terms with. This is known as the spoils system. Many saw this to be a tyrannical use of power, but Jackson did have a reasonable argument- he was indeed appointing only people from his own party, but those were the people he trusted the most, so it would be natural to consider them before anyone else. He also believed in rotation of office- this limited officials to one term in office, so he could more easily appoint a Democrat to take his place. Jackson would serve two terms in office, working through various events.

The Peggy Eaton Affair was an incident that involved a woman named Peggy Eaton, and her husband, John Eaton, the Secretary of War under Jackson. John was not Peggy’s first husband- she was previously married to a naval officer, who had died overseas. Then, after an improperly short amount of time, she remarried to John Eaton. The wives of many members of Jackson’s cabinet did not like Peggy Eaton, and after Jackson tried to force the members of Cabinet to accept John and Peggy (he likely felt sympathy for them since he could relate to their situation), all but one of the members resigned. The person who stayed was Martin Van Buren, who Jackson would appoint as Vice President in his next term. Van Buren was also a member of Jackson’s “Kitchen Cabinet”- an unofficial cabinet that Jackson mostly listened to over his actual cabinet. This “Kitchen Cabinet” was made up of trusted friends and political allies.

In 1830, Jackson approved the Indian Removal Act. Much of American land in the West was still unsettled, and Jackson sympathized with the land hungry frontier residents who were hindered by Native Americans. The Indian Removal Act thus forced Native Americans living in Southwest to move westward. Most tribes begrudgingly accepted this and moved away, except for the Cherokees, who protested by challenging this act in the Supreme Court. In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, the Cherokees were denied of their sovereignty and were forced to submit to the new laws. However, later, in Worcester v. Georgia, the Supreme Court overturned it’s past decision and decided that the Cherokees were a separate nation that could not be affected by a state’s laws. However, the state of Georgia did not like this. While the Supreme Court was the higher court, they could not enforce their decision without the President’s approval. Jackson, of course, supported Georgia, and so the Cherokees had no choice but to leave. The Cherokees were against this decision, but in the end, after Jackson had left office, the US Army forced them out of their homeland. Their trek to their relocation is known as the Trail of Tears. As many as 4000 Cherokees died during this journey.

Another incident that Jackson faced was the the Nullification Crisis. At this time the Tariff of Abominations was still active, and South Carolina decided to declare it unconstitutional and nullify it (ignore it). This sparked a political debate, which was exacerbated when officials in South Carolina decided to hold a convention which decided that they would also nullify the new Tariff of 1832 and also refuse to collect tariffs in the state. Jackson, who was in favor of keeping the nation together, had enough. He issued the Proclamation to the People of South Carolina, warning that nullification is an act of treason. He also prepared the military. In the end, though, the military was not used, and compromise was reached when Jackson suggested that some terms in the tariff be modified.

On the other hand, Jackson also satisfied Southerners by taking a pro-slavery stance. He used his power to stop anti-slavery literature from being distributed through the US mail system.

The last issue would occupy the rest of Jackson’s first term, as well as his entire second term. This was Bank War. A central bank had always been a topic of controversy since the beginning of American politics. The bank in question was the Second Bank of the United States, which was created in order to help fund the War of 1812. The bank was privately owned, however it did a reasonably good job of stabilizing the economy except during the Panic of 1819, where poor credit policies caused an economic downturn. The owner of the bank, Nicholas Biddle, was known to be very arrogant, which made people suspect that that the bank was only serving the interests of the wealthy. Jackson agreed with this narrative, and, like most Democrat-Republicans, thought that the bank was unconstitutional. Jackson was also personally affected by the Panic of 1819, adding to his grudge. Clay, a supporter of the bank, convinced Congress to approve the renewal of the Bank’s charter, but Jackson vetoed this action. This was seen as tyrannical by his opponents and earned him the nicknamed “King Andrew the First”.

Although initially Jackson and Clay were from the same Democrat-Republican party, the controversy over the bank helped in splitting this party apart. Supporters of Jackson were now simply a part of the Democrat party, and supporters of Clay formed the Whig party. The Whig Party was generally an embodiment of the forgotten Federalist beliefs.

Jackson won the election of 1832, and used his second term to ensure the destruction of the bank and prepare a plan for succession. First, he transferred the funds from the bank into other state banks, which were called “pet banks” by Jackson’s enemies. Jackson then issued the Specie Circular- as a result of recent financial practices, the prices for land and other things were highly inflated. One of the key causes of this inflation was speculation, where people would over-pay for various commodities because they expect the value would further increase. In order to stop this, the Specie Circular demanded that only specie (valuable metals like gold/silver) be used to purchase federal lands. This made it more difficult to purchase land at inflated prices since people would have less usable money. However, Jackson underestimated how important land speculation was towards the economy, and because banknotes could no longer be used to purchase federal land, they actually began to lose their value. This contributed to the Panic of 1837, an economic depression caused by poor banking prices and a real estate bubble.

In the Election of 1836, Van Buren, an outstanding politician who was also Jackson’s former vice president ran for president against nominees of the Whig Party. The Whig Party attempted to pull a trick similar to the one in the election of 1824. By nominating three candidates, they could prevent Van Buren from winning a majority, and throw the election in the House of Representatives, where they could have a higher chance of election by directly persuading congressmen. This was unsuccessful though- Van Buren won 58% of the electoral vote.

Van Buren had to deal with the Panic of 1837, which the Whigs used to their advantage- they took every opportunity to remind the public that it was the fault of the Democrats’ laissez-faire style of economic management that had lead to the panic. As a result, the Whigs’ chances for election during the election of 1840 were looking good. The Whigs nominated William Henry “Tippecanoe” Harrison and John Tyler as President and Vice President. Knowing that the presidential election was in the hands of the common person more than ever before, they made sure to portray Harrison as a humble man who lived in a rustic log cabin, despite the fact that Harrison in reality was extraordinarily wealthy. They also made sure to portray Van Buren as an aristocrat who did not have the common person’s interest in mind. They also enjoyed calling him “Martin Van Ruin”, relating to the Panic of 1837. Harrison won the election. However he died of pneumonia after a few weeks of being president- so John Tyler, “His Accidency”, became the President. Tyler turned out to be a traitor of sorts- he often supported democratic legislation and even vetoed Whig bank bills.

In the period between 1800-1850, the US saw the flourishing of a new American culture. By now the Napoleonic Wars were a thing of the past, and the new generation focused only on their own country, which developed a strong sense of nationalism. Philosophers around the world also began to embrace Romanticism- an ideology based upon intuition, feelings, and connection with nature, as opposed to Enlightenment, which was characterized by reasoning and order. Romanticist philosophers in the United States were known as the Transcendentalists. They were primarily based in New England. Transcendentalist writers like Emerson and Thoreau both advocated for independent thinking, and for one to support what he believes to be right. Most notably, Thoreau put his Transcendentalist philosophy to use- he lived in the woods for two years to reconnect with nature, and allowed himself to be jailed for refusing to pay a tax that would support a war with Mexico that he thought was unjust. Transcendentalism was also expressed through painting, where artists frequently depicted scenes of everyday life, architecture that took inspiration from Greek styles in reference to democracy in Ancient Greece, and literature with American themes, written by Eastern authors like Hawthorne, Poe, and Irving.

Another transcendentalist, George Ripley, decided not just to change his own ideals, but to make an entire transcendentalist community. This community was called Brook Farm. It was initially successful, but since many of its members were intellectuals just like Ripley, Brook Farm was not able to produce many basic resources and ended up accruing increasing debts as they had to import these resources from outside. A massive fire also did not help their situation, and in 1849 the Brook Farm experiment was ended.

In fact, during this time period, many people had the same idea as Ripley- to create a utopia (ideal community). The Shakers practiced equality, and even went as far as to claim that God was a dual-gendered person. They did away with the traditional patriarchal structure of Christian sects and made both men and women community leaders. They also opposed sexual intercourse, which made it difficult for their numbers to grow. They initially replenished their numbers through conversions and adopting orphans, but growth in orphanages and lack of conversions spelled their downfall. They were a relatively successful community though, and became respected for their furniture making skills.

Another attempt at an utopian community were the Fourier communities. A man named Charles Fourier believed that in time, society would slowly transform into a socialist style of life. One of his students, Albert Brisbane, set up many socialist communities in the United States. However, these communities were unsuccessful because it turned out, the average person was just too selfish in order to make a socialist community work.

One of the more questionable communities was the Oneida Community. This community was started by a person named John Noyes, who created something very similar to the Shaker community, however, instead of complete abstinence, he decided it would be best to do the opposite: Noyes believed in “complex marriage”, where everyone in the community was married to each other. This community also believed in “Perfectionism”, where it is thought that Christ had already returned to Earth and that people could live perfect lives. Noyes was (understandably) prosecuted for adultery, so he fled to Canada and left his community behind. The Oneida Community then did away with the practice of complex marriage. They found success when a wealthy man who had profited off of making steel animal traps joined them, allowing them to make a profitable silverware business.

The most successful community was the Latter-day Church (Mormonism). It was created by Joseph Smith Jr., who started this community because he began to have religious visions. Members of this church practiced very traditional Christian beliefs. However, almost everyone hated Mormons. Smith initially brought his followers to Jackson County in Missouri, but was driven out by Protestant ministers. Then, he went to Nauvoo, Illinois. The Mormons were on bad terms with their neighbors, and their reputation only worsened when Smith introduced the idea of “multiple celestial marriage” (polygamy), to his settlement. Smith was eventually arrested for conspiracy to settle in Mexican territory, and was assassinated while in prison. The Mormon community then split- some stayed in the United States, while others followed a new leader Brigham Young into Utah, where they created Salt Lake City. Settlement was initially troublesome due to political conflict with anti-Mormons, but eventually settled in compromise. Because they pushed individual values that resulted in success in capitalism, the Mormons became a successful community that has a church of over 12 million people today.

America also had a second Great Awakening, where yet more people turned to God. More preachers began to focus on their audiences, and emphasized salvation for all. Charles Grandison Finney was one of the most notable preachers of this type. His sermons frequently contained detailed depictions of Hell, and called his followers to action by reasoning that their hard work and faith would save them from Hell. His sermons were so powerful that they reportedly converted entire cities. Finney mainly preached in New York, and parts of New York even became known as “burned-over districts” because of how often preachers depicted the consequences of sin and faithlessness.

The early 1800s saw not only religious reform, but also societal reform. The Temperance movement was made up of mostly women, who had watched their husbands fall down the spiral of alcohol addiction. They urged drinkers to take up total abstinence. The Women’s Christian Temperance Union would also the reason for the 18th Amendment, which would start the Prohibition period in the future. Many charitable people also helped reform public asylums- places for people that need assistance to live. This included an increase in mental hospitals, the result of the efforts of Dorothy Dix spending her time to raise awareness for the current poor state of mental hospitals, new schools for the blind and deaf, and more new designs for prisons. Public education also went through a makeover- Horace Mann, a member of the Massachusetts Board of Education, achieved compulsory attendance for all children, a longer school year, and increased teacher preparation. These ideas spread from Massachusetts, increasing the quality of education across the country. In American schools, students not only learned essential subjects, but also learned religious topics, described as “moral education”. Leaders in the Second Great Awakening also founded many universities, like Oberlin College in Ohio.

In this time period, two of the biggest civil rights movements would begin- Women’s Rights and Antislavery.

During the Market Revolution the average family size decreased from 7 to 5- this was the result of many factors, such as better job opportunities lowering the marginal benefit of an extra child, or a lower child mortality rate, lessening the need for extra children. Women now had more time to devote towards things other than taking care of children and making the home. The development of city jobs meant that in many families, the father would be absent most of the time to work, so the mother would take charge of the home. This portrayed them as the moral leaders of humanity. Women have also long resented how men were often superior to them in different aspects of society. When Elizabeth Cady Stanton met Lucretia Mott met each other at the World Anti-Slavery Conference in London, they were both were unhappy about being excluded from the proceedings simply because they were women, and vowed that they would bring about change. They and other like-minded feminists gathered in New York at the Seneca Falls Convention, where the women produced the Declaration of Sentiments, a similar article to the Declaration of Independence, where the women listed their grievances against the unfair customs of society. After the convention, many feminists continued to spread awareness and lead campaigns related to women’s rights. However, the women’s rights movement would be temporarily overshadowed by the more important anti-slavery movement.

The anti-slavery movements fell along a spectrum of moderate to radical. While moderates wanted to slowly end slavery, radicals wanted immediate end of slavery. One of the interesting ideas for helping end slavery was the American Colonization Society, where free slaves would be sent to Africa (their “homeland”), which was agreeable towards those that did not support emancipation of slaves in the United States. However, most slaves at this point were too connected to the country, and refused to leave to Africa, which to them was a foreign land at this point.

In 1831, radical abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison created the Liberator newspaper. This was one of the radical antislavery movements, which called for the freeing of all slaves without compensation for slaveowners. Garrison also created the American Anti-Slavery Society in order to further spread his moral argument. Some of Garrisons followers believed that political action was more effective than moral persuasion created the Liberty Party, and tried to get their candidate elected for President. They did not win.

Among some of the other most outspoken anti-slavery movements were those led by former slaves themselves. Frederick Douglass, a former slave who also created a newspaper called the North Star, used his former experiences as a slave to help convince people of it’s wrongs. Other African Americans like Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth not only contributed to anti-slavery campaigns, but also assisted many slaves towards freedom in the Underground Railroad.

The most radical kind of anti-slavery activist was the violent one. While violence is certainly the most actionable decision, it also produces the worst reputations. In Virginia, a slave named Nat Turner lead a bloody rebellion against various slaveowners. The rebellion was put down, and in retaliation white slaveowners massacred many of their slaves. Nat Turner’s rebellion and Garrison’s extreme views further drove away the South from the topic of anti-slavery. This would contribute in setting the state for the upcoming Civil War.