# Unit 1 (College Board Unit 1.1-3.2)

The first people in the Americas came from a land bridge that existed tens of thousands of years ago, connecting Asia to Alaska. By 1491, the migrants became very diverse, and spread throughout the Americas.

In the Southern Americas were the massive Aztec, Mayan, and Incan empires (listed from north to south). They are characterized by huge cities, developed religion and politics, and maize farming, which spread northward.

Due to lack of a strong food source (maize), the rest of North America was made up of smaller civilizations, whose sustenance was a mixture of hunting-gathering and agriculture. Within North America are several denominations of tribes: the Southwest, where life was difficult due to arid climates and frequent conflict; the Northwest, which had the most greenery, allowing for a diverse diet, but remained disjoint due to harsh terrain; the Great Plains, where tribes that did not live near a river with adequate farmland were nomadic, in order to follow food sources; and the Northeast, which was similar to the Northwest, but without harsh terrain.

Two very notable groups of natives were the Cahokia settlement, established near the Mississippi River Valley. Despite being a plains tribe, they found great success in agriculture. The other group was the Iroquois Confederation, a strong alliance of Northeastern tribes that heavily influenced European colonization by siding with the English during conflict.

The Europeans were uninterested in the Americas until the 1400s, where the desire to spread religion, discover uncontrolled trade routes, and to support newly merged territories prompted exploration. The first two countries to do so were Spain and Portugal, who divided the Americas laterally through Brazil in the Treaty of Tordesillas.

The two other European powers, England and France, were initially slow to colonize, because they were heavily afflicted by the Protestant Reformation. They both created either small or failed colonies in the Mid-Atlantic and Canada, respectively.

Initial exploration in the Americas started the Columbian Exchange: the exchange of agriculture, disease, livestock, people, and technology between Europe, the Americas, and Africa. The benefits for Europe in the Colombian Exchange supported a transition into Capitalism, where, instead being funded by monarchs, voyages were funded by joint-stock companies, which pooled the money of multiple investors. This lowered investment risk, resulting in more capital for voyages.

During the 1500s, Spain was by far the most powerful country in terms of exploration. With the help of disease and various friendly tribes, Hernan Cortes and Francisco Pizarro conquered the Aztecs and Incas and exported massive amounts of gold and silver back to Spain. The surviving natives were enslaved through the encomienda system, where native land was delegated to multiple Spanish rulers, who enslaved anyone living upon it. However, the natives made bad slaves because their knowledge of the land enabled easy escape, and because they kept dying of disease. As a result, the Spanish followed the Portuguese, who were using Africans in their sugar plantations. At the time, Africa was made of many warring tribes, who would often sell prisoners into slavery in exchange for European goods. In addition to this, Spanish scholars such as Bartolomeu de Las Casas did not support Indian slavery, accelerating the change. The Spanish tried to justify African slavery with religious interpretations, similar to how they justified Native American slavery.

The Spanish also created a caste system, which taxed people based on how much Spanish ancestry they have, with Spaniards born in Spain having to pay the least taxes.

The English, who began arriving in the 1600s, also had bad relations with the Natives, but due to their diminishing population, expelled them from their land instead of enslaving them. In contrast to this, the French and the Dutch, were the only countries to maintain good relations with local tribes, and focused on expanding fur trade. In reaction to the arrival of more Europeans, the native tribes either allied themselves with the Europeans, or migrated away. They would not, however, ally themselves with each until much later.

By the 1600s, every major European nation was exploring the Americas. The Spanish, motivated by religion and riches, spread northward up to the south of what is now the United States, founding several major cities. The French and Dutch were business-motivated and focused on setting up trading posts near northern rivers. Due to worsening living conditions in England, English settlers arrived in search of a better life.

At this time, English colonization also began to pick up. The English would create 13 colonies in total. The first was Jamestown, which would become Virginia. It was run by the Virginia Company. Jamestown residents experienced a brutal first year, because settlers were too lazy to work, started conflict with Indians, and suffered from disease. The settlers only met their lucky break when a supply ship that was blown wayward discovered an abandoned Spanish tobacco plantation, introducing the lucrative concept of tobacco farming to the English. Furthermore, settler John Rolfe married Pocahontas, the daughter of a powerful leader of multiple northeastern tribes, Chief Powhatan. The marriage ensured a temporary peace between Indians and the settlers. Tobacco farming lead many English to arrive to Jamestown through the head-right system, where free land was given to those who paid for the Atlantic voyages. Unfortunately, Jamestown was still in a dangerous position due to disease and remaining Indian conflict, so the Virginia Company had its charter revoked, and King James I took control of the colony, making Jamestown the first royal colony. Nevertheless, Virginia kept it’s representative form of government, the House of Burgesses, though it catered mainly towards wealthy landowners.

Two other colonies were settled by people known as Puritans. They sought a refined form of Christianity that was very different from the Anglican Church in England, and were prosecuted as a result. The first colony was Plymouth in Massachusetts, founded by Puritans known as the Pilgrims. After surviving a bad winter, they were assisted by local natives, which they celebrated during the first ever Thanksgiving feast. Unlike the settlers of Jamestown, the Puritans were diligent workers, so Plymouth became a slow-growing but prosperous colony. The other colony was the Massachusetts Bay Colony, founded for similar reasons. The Massachusetts Bay Colony later grew rapidly when religious persecution of Puritans drove them there. Ironically, the Massachusetts Bay Colony practiced persecution of non-Puritans, leading to creation of the Rhode Island and Hartford colonies, which practiced more (but not total) toleration. These colonies made up the Northeastern colonies, and were characterized by smaller-scale farms and fishing/shipbuilding industries. Government in the Northeastern colonies was representative, but was often limited to church-attending males only.

Maryland was unique in that it was the first proprietorship, a colony ruled by a noble given permission by a monarch. Maryland was initially intended to be a haven for Catholics, who faced persecution by English Protestants. However, the Protestant Revolt during the late 1600s removed many rights from Catholics.

The Carolinas were established by Charles II, and became plantation-based settlements, growing cash crops such as rice and tobacco. They were proprietorships lead by nobles who had helped Charles II to the throne. While South Carolina relied on African slavery to support plantations, North Carolina attracted independent farmers, due to poor harbors that made import of slaves difficult.

In between the Northern and Southern colonies were the Middle colonies. The first middle colony was New York, which was created to shrink the gap between the Northern and Southern colonies. There was a small Dutch colony there already, on Manhattan Island. Despite this, the British easily took over New York, but still provided the Dutch many freedoms.

King James thought that New York was too large, so he later split off New Jersey, which was further split into East and West New Jersey. These colonies practiced religious toleration. Eventually they were merged back into New Jersey.

The last middle colony was Pennsylvania, named after William Penn, the proprietor of the land. William Penn’s son, who was also named “William Penn” took control of the colony after the first William Penn passed away. The younger William Penn was a Quaker. Quakers distrusted the Church and the Bible, believing religious authority was found within people themselves. They also supported gender equality. As a result of their unpopular beliefs, they were prosecuted in England, so Penn designed Pennsylvania to be a safe place for the Quakers and other prosecuted peoples.

Delaware was created in a minor event when Penn let a few counties in Pennsylvania split off.

Georgia was the final colony, and also completed the four southern colonies. It had two strong motivations: to protect the southern colonies from Spanish-controlled Florida, and to act as a new home for debtors, since jails in England were overcrowding. Plantation culture from South Carolina bled into Georgia, but Georgia never became a big colony because of the unique circumstance of it’s creation, as well as the fact that they had an oppressive governor.

Though the colonists might have had their own needs to settle in the Americas, European countries were still motivated by money. This motivation lead to the Triangular Trade, where slaves from Africa take the middle passage to the Americas, American farms and plantations produce raw goods which are exported to Europe, and Europeans consume these goods, or use them to purchase more slaves from Africa. In fact, slave trading was so lucrative that it became a proper business.

Note how the colonies never produced anything for use, only resources which were processed in Europe. This is due to the principle of Mercantilism, which says to become wealthy, a country must export more than it imports. To follow this concept, England enacted the Navigation Acts, forbidding their colonies from trade with other countries. This reduced trade competition, which was great for England but terrible for the settlers, who were forced to pay unfair prices to purchase English goods, and to sell their produce at low prices. Fortunately, the Navigation Acts were not strictly enforced. Because of corrupt colonial agents, geographical separation, and turmoil in England, enforcing the Navigation Acts was difficult, so the settlers still illegally traded with other countries. This phenomenon of relaxed control is known as salutary neglect.

Sometimes the Navigation Acts were enforced. King James II, angered by the settlers’ ignorance, turned the New England colonies into a merged royal colony called the Dominion of New England, and appointed an oppressive governor. The Dominion of New England was short lived, however, because after James II was overthrown in the Glorious Revolution, William and Mary decided to return New England back to it’s original state. Despite the new leadership, salutary neglect was still present until the late 1700s.

By the mid-1600s, European presence in the Americas was increasing steadily, to the dismay of Native Americans. Metacom (also known as King Philip), a Native American leader, lead a deadly, but unsuccessful revolt in New England, spurred by settlers encroaching on native lands. In Virginia, independent farmers were growing unhappy, because the governor protected surrounding native lands for trade purposes, at the expense of the farmers’ income. In response, Nathaniel Bacon organized a group of farmers to attack several surrounding Indian establishments, as well as the settlement itself after the governor attempted to stop him. The rebellion was stopped after Bacon died of disease. In the Southwest, the Pueblo were unhappy with the Spanish’s conversion efforts, and lead a successful revolt that drove the Spanish out for several years.

Meanwhile, due to the increasing number of plantations in the southern colonies, plantation owners were experiencing labor shortages. Native Americans died or escaped too easily, and white indentured servants were small in number and non-permanent. Like the Spanish and Portuguese, English plantation owners turned to African slavery. The majority of Africans were imported to Britain’s Caribbean plantations as well as the southern colonies. In fact, slaves in South Carolina and Virginia made up more than half of the population. In order to squeeze out additional work force, southern colonies enacted a string of laws that further curtailed the freedoms of African Americans and their descendants. Even more laws were enacted due to the fear of African rebellion.

By the 1700s, the colonies were experiencing rapid growth. Most new immigrants headed to the southern or middle colonies, because land was limited in New England. A more normalized version of English society was also developing, with wealthy land owners known as the gentility began trying to emulate the extremely wealthy English aristocrats. Unlike in England, where most were desperately poor, the masses in the colonies were made up of farmers and craftsmen. The ample food and supply and higher standards of living caused strict family traditions like arranged marriages to break down. Religion also slowly lost influence, due to the diversity of the immigrants.

Economic specialization also emerged. In the New England colonies, harsh winters and bad terrain meant the only existing farms were independent subsistence farms. People usually had other ways to make a living, leveraging their coast access to master shipbuilding, fishing and trading. In the middle colonies, soil was good enough for many large (but not massive) farms to exist. Access to many rivers also provided good trading opportunities. Finally, the southern colonies were a mixture of independent subsistence farmers and massive plantations that farmed cash crops.

In the mid-1700s, there occurred a religious event known as the Great Awakening, where many radical preachers began stressing the importance of self in religion. This made religion a more independent practice than ever before, where people were encouraged to study the Bible by themselves. Proponents and opponents of this movement were known as the New and Old Lights respectively. Ideological changes also occurred outside of the religious world, where the creation of many newspapers supported freedom of information, and the Enlightenment period introduced new philosophies that would eventually be used in the Constitution. The colonies also developed differences from England. They were diverse, supported freedom of press, speech, and religion, and also exercised representative democratic government, though voting rights were often limited to specific classes of people. During this time period, differences in opinions on Indian policy already began to brew British resentment in the colonies.

At this time the struggle for survival in colonies also disappeared, allowing for specialized endeavors. Motivated by religion, many religious groups founded school and universities, including some of the best known in the modern world, such as Harvard, Yale, and Princeton. Scientific development also started, and people like Benjamin Franklin became famous for developing useful technologies.

Starting in the late 1600s and lasting nearly a century was a period of war in Europe between the three powers, Britain, France and Spain. Wars broke out all over the globe for European and North American control. These wars were generally successful for the British, who managed to capture French land, fend off the Spanish from Georgia, and gain trading rights in Central America. The British relied on colonists for manpower, but still made decisions to benefit themselves. One example of this is when the colonists successfully captured Louisbourg, a major French fortress, but were later made to return it so the British could gain some more privileges in French-controlled India.

The last of these wars was the most serious, and had the most implications. It was known as the Seven Years war. It was started when settlers realized the French had settled all the way down to the Ohio River Valley, and were beginning construction of a series of forts that would prevent westward expansion. British attempts to stop this construction were unsuccessful, because they were outmatched by the French and their Indian allies. In the midst of the war, Benjamin Franklin suggested a plan called the Albany Plan of the Union, which was aimed at uniting the colonies into one group. It was not successful, but would set the precedent for a union during the American Revolution. Eventually, the British devised some much better strategies, and the Seven Years war ended with a French and Spanish loss. Britain acquired Florida and parts of Canada, and France relinquished the Louisiana territory to Spain (but would later acquire it again in the 1800s).

The result of the Seven Years war seemed terrific for the British. They were now the sole power in the Americas. The colonists could relax, knowing there would be no more risk of foreign attack. However, despite a collective victory, contempt began to brew between the mainland British and the colonists. They both viewed each other as poor fighters. Now that the British had more time to concentrate on managing the colonies, salutary neglect was abandoned, and the British began exercising increased control on the colonies, to the dislike of the colonists. The local native Americans were also unhappy with British rule, so Pontiac, a Native American chief, lead an unsuccessful rebellion against Americans in the Ohio River Valley, where the French formerly resided. In order to reduce Indian conflict, the British issued the Proclamation of 1763, which prohibited migration westward of the Appalachian Mountains. It was ignored by the settlers.

Winning the Seven Years War and the wars that preceded it was very costly for the British government. In order to avoid falling into debt, the British government began to heavily tax the colonists. This action would set the stage for the American Revolution.